Precedent
=========

Incentivizing arbitrators and parties to voluntarily opt for publication of arbitral awards.

Bootstrapping a million new legal systems.

Three felonies a day, ignorance of the law(rational ignorance, Somin),


Recognition. Recognition of law was based on kinship and contractual reciprocities motivated by the ebenfits of individual rights and private property. Indeed, a "mental codification of abstract rules" existed, so that legal decisions were part of a "going order"(Benson, Citing Popisil, Anthropology of Law: A Comparative Theory). Grammatical phrases or references to soecific customs, precedents, or rules were present in all adjudication decisions that Popisil observed. He concluded: "not only does a legal decision solve a specific case, but it also formulates an ideal - a solution intended to be utilized in a similar situation in the future. The ideal component binds all other members of the group who did not particiapte in the case under consideration. The [adjudicator] himself turns to his previous decisions for consistency. In a way, they also bind him. Lawyers speak in such a case about thw binding force of the precedent."(Id.)

Benson, The Enterprise of Law: Justice Without the State

Externalities and Public Goods

The externality argument for public provision of law and order mught be characterized this way. private sector production of law and law enforcement generates external benefits for which private suppliers may be unable to charge. Suppose that a few individuals hire a private security firm to patrol their neighborhood. The patrol deters criminals, both for those who the the firm and those who do not. Thus, there are strong free-rider incentives at work here. If everyone paid for the benefits received, the firm would patrol more often and prevent more crime; but because individuals can reap benefits without paying, they have strong incentives not to enter into the neighborhood group that hired the firm. Even many strong free market advocates have accepted the validity of this argument.

If there is a significant free-rider problem, it means that too little private sector protection is purchased and produced. The problem arises because individuals cannot be persuaded to cooperate in buying the good or service in question, not because the private sector would not produce it if producers were fully compensated for the benefits that they provide. Professor Richard Epstein concluded:

In essence the entire system of governane presupposes that in a state of nature there are two, and only two failures of the system of private rights. The first is the inability to control private aggression, to which the police power is the proper response. The second is that voluntary transactions cannot generate the centralized power needed to combat private aggression. There are transaction costs, holdout and free-rider problems that are almost insurmountable when the conduct of a large number of individuals must be organized. To this problem, the proper response is the power to force exchanges upon payment for public use.

This argument has been used to a greater or lesser degree to justify the historical trend of increasing production of such services to supplement or replace private sector production efforts.

**A similar rationale has been made to justify the public provision of courts. Perhaps the most widely claimed external benefit of court decisions is the body of law or precedents that court decisisons generate. Mabry, et., for instance, wrote that "the continuous creation of a collection of decisions, interpretations, opinions, and precedents is the productions of a collectively consumed service. ... Since they are available to others at no additional cost, precedents are externalities. Indeed the entire set of law known as common law has developed as an external benefit of past adjudication. While individuals would be willing to pay for the private benefits they obtain from a private court (e.g. dispute resolution, restitituion), they would be the only benefits considered. The failure to recognize and capture payment for additional benefit accruing to the community at large implies that suppliers in a private market would be unwilling to provide enough judicial services to maximize the net benefits of adjudication.

A similar but perhaps even more fundamental externality argument is put forth by even the staunchest supporters of the market economy. F. A. Hayek, for instance, argued that "government becomes indispensible...in order to see that the mechanism which regulates the production of...goods and services is kept in working order...it provides an essential condition for the preservation of...overall order." Clearly defined property rights are critical requirements for the operation of a market system, so some system of defining and then protecting and enforcing property rights is needed before a market economy can develop. Enforcement of property rights, it is suggested, requires coercion, and only the government is widely viewed to have coercive powers. The establishment of laws and a mechanism for their enforcement, therefore, has the beneficial external effect of allowing the market economy to develop and function. Because no private individual who might benefit from laws and their enforcement would be able to charge for all the benefits generated, too few laws and too little enforcement would develop without government. Besides, individuals would not freely grant other individuals the power to coerce.

It could be contended that the existence of nonexclusionary external benefits makes laws and law enforcement "public goods." And they are, given Samuelson's delineation of the domain of public goods: "A public good is one that enters two or more persons' utility. What are we left with? With a knife-edge pole of the private good case, and with all the rest of the world in the public good domain by virtue of involving some consumption externality." As Goldin pointed out, however, the theory of public goods "is dangerous and misleading theory if it suggests to the unwary that government services should be handled as if they were public goods." The efficient provision of goods that generate benefits requires cooperation, but cooperation does not always require government. Wheneverexternal benefits exist, there are tremendous incentives to internalize them. Consequently, voluntary cooperation occurs daily in the private sector. Every market transaction involves cooperation between the buyer and seller, every good or service produced requires the voluntary cooperation of input suppliers, and every contract is a formal agreement to cooperate. A major distinction between government and private sector is the means used to induce cooperation.





